Add blog post: Rust smoltcp as an alternative TCP/IP stack for ESP-IDF (#742)
espressif/developer-portal: content/blog/2026/06/rust-smoltcp-network-stack-for-esp-idf/index.md

---
title: "Rust smoltcp as an alternative TCP/IP stack for ESP-IDF"

> date: "2026-06-11"

Reviewer: Suggest 06-19 to have some time for editorial review

Author: Done, date is 2026-06-19.

summary: "A set of ESP-IDF components that run the Rust smoltcp stack as the IPv4/IPv6 data plane, while keeping esp_http_server, esp-tls and esp-mqtt working without source changes. This article explains the linker --wrap shim that makes it compatible, the single-task poll architecture, the throughput I measured on an ESP32-P4 (91.15 Mbit/s on a 100 Mbit link), and the limitations to be aware of."

> featureAsset: "img/featured/featured-rust.webp"

Reviewer: it's usually more engaging if you attach some picture, maybe just a screenshot from the component manager landing on your smaltcp component

Author: Added a screenshot of the esp_smoltcp registry page in the Getting started section.

authors:
    - sylwester-sosnowski
tags: ["Rust", "smoltcp", "Networking", "TCP/IP", "ESP-IDF", "ESP32-P4", "lwIP"]
---

> ## Why a second TCP/IP stack

Reviewer 2: My suggestion is to change this to **Introduction** and move **Why a second TCP/IP stack** to where you introduce smoltcp and change the first sentence.

```
##Why a second TCP/IP stack

[smoltcp](https://github.com/smoltcp-rs/smoltcp) it's a
`#![no_std]` TCP/IP stack written in Rust, with no heap requirement and a...
```

Author: Done — split into an "Introduction" section (lwIP context, the two motivations) and "Why a second TCP/IP stack" opening with the smoltcp description, as you sketched.

ESP-IDF ships with lwIP, and for most projects that's the right choice. It's
mature, well documented, and every networking component in IDF is built and
tested against it. Nothing below is an argument to replace it by default.

Still, there are two reasons you might want an alternative. The first is the
implementation language: the IP stack is the part of your firmware that
parses bytes arriving from machines you don't control, and lwIP is written
in C. The second is the concurrency model — lwIP runs several tasks and
takes a fair number of mutexes, which is harder to reason about when you
need confidence that a device will stay up for months without intervention.

[smoltcp](https://github.com/smoltcp-rs/smoltcp) addresses both. It's a
`#![no_std]` TCP/IP stack written in Rust, with no heap requirement and a
single, explicit poll model: you give it the current time and a device to
read and write frames, it does one pass of work, and you call it again. The
packet parsing is safe Rust, and there's no background thread operating on
the stack behind your code.

Now, getting smoltcp to run on an ESP32 is not the hard part. The hard part

> is running it *under ESP-IDF without giving up the IDF networking stack you

Reviewer 2: ...is running it *under ESP-IDF without giving up the native networking stack you...

Author: Done, reworded to "the native networking stack".

already depend on* — `esp_http_server`, `esp-tls`, `esp_http_client`,
`esp-mqtt`, mbedTLS. If switching stacks means forking all of that, it's a
toy. So the goal was source compatibility: keep those components, and the
application code that uses them, completely unchanged.

That turned out to be achievable, and verified on real hardware at roughly
wire-line speed. This article goes through how it works and where the edges
are.

## How compatibility works: a linker `--wrap` shim

> Every IDF networking component eventually calls BSD sockets — `socket()`,

Reviewer 2: IDF -> ESP-IDF

`bind()`, `listen()`, `accept()`, `send()`, `recv()`, `select()`,

> `getaddrinfo()`. In the IDF, these come from `<lwip/sockets.h>`, and the

Reviewer 2: IDF -> ESP-IDF
Please replace all IDF with ESP-IDF.

Author: Done — replaced every standalone "IDF" with "ESP-IDF" throughout (prose and the architecture diagram; code identifiers like idf.py untouched).

            esp_eth_handle_t  (your driver, attached above)
```

Three decisions shape how this behaves under load:

**A single task owns the stack.** There's one poll loop. It blocks on a
FreeRTOS event group, wakes when a frame arrives or a socket needs service,
runs exactly one `iface.poll()` pass, and goes back to sleep. Because
nothing else ever touches smoltcp, there are no locks protecting it. The
BSD shim marshals work onto that task instead of reaching into the stack
from arbitrary contexts.

**RX frames come from a slab pool, not the heap.** The pool is fixed in
size and count and allocated once. Under load that gives you bounded RAM
and an explicit drop counter (`esp_smoltcp_frame_pool_drops()`) instead of
heap fragmentation and a mystery. If the pool runs dry, that's a number you
can read, not a leak you have to hunt.

**The Rust side is `no_std`** with an internal-RAM-first allocator, built
for `riscv32imafc-unknown-none-elf` to match the ESP32-P4 high-performance
cores (hard float, compressed instructions). The TX scratch buffer is a
static pool. The pinned toolchain is recorded in a `rust-toolchain.toml`,
so `rustup` selects it automatically.

## Performance

> The hardware is a Waveshare ESP32-P4-Nano with the built-in 100 Mbit/s

Reviewer 2: Please add a link to the Waveshare ESP32-P4-Nano product.

Author: Done, linked to the Waveshare product page.

download endpoint; the measurement is a 200 MB transfer pulled with `curl`
(curl reports it as 190M because it counts in MiB):

```bash
$ curl http://<ip>/dl/200000000 --output foo
100  190M    0  190M    0     0  10.8M     0  --:--:--  0:00:17  --:--:--  10.8M

# the server logs, after the transfer completes:
I (...) app: dl: 200000000 bytes in 17552922 us = 91.15 Mbit/s
```

That's **91.15 Mbit/s sustained.** The practical ceiling on a 100 Mbit
link at MTU 1500, after Ethernet, IP and TCP framing, is about 94.85
Mbit/s, so this is roughly 96% of the realistic maximum; the remaining
few percent is framing overhead that nothing can get back. Across the
200 MB transfer there were 0 TX failures and 0 frame-pool drops, and
round-trip ping on the wire sits at 0.4–0.7 ms.

To be clear, that number is the result of tuning, not the first run.
Getting there took a 1 kHz FreeRTOS tick so the poll loop is serviced often
enough, enabling the EMAC hardware flow control, and moving the hot path
into IRAM so it isn't stalled on flash access. A throughput figure without
its conditions isn't worth much, so those are the conditions.

> The cost on the build is roughly +80 KiB of code and ~120 KiB of BSS (the

Reviewer: It would be also good to compare with the lwip component -- footprint, static mem usage, heap usage.

I've just quickly checked on esp32c3
```
Archive File                    ┃ Total Size ┃  DRAM ┃  .bss ┃ .data ┃ .text ┃ Flash Code ┃  .text ┃ Flash Data ┃
libsmoltcp_glue.a               │     108317 │ 24580 │     0 │ 24580 │     0 │      82206 │  82206 │       1531 │           0 │    1531 │
libwpa_supplicant.a             │      82613 │  1370 │  1362 │     8 │     0 │      79698 │  79698 │       1545 │           0 │    1545 │
libmbedcrypto.a                 │      77528 │   426 │   252 │    88 │    86 │      70594 │  70594 │       6508 │           0 │    6508 │
libpp.a                         │      68725 │ 20082 │  1262 │  2644 │ 16176 │      44774 │  44774 │       3869 │           0 │    3869 │
libesp_smoltcp.a                │      53940 │ 50491 │ 49905 │     0 │   586 │       3408 │   3408 │         41 │           0 │      41 │
liblwip.a                       │      48645 │   969 │   965 │     4 │     0 │      47430 │  47430 │        246 │           0 │     246 │
```
PS: I can maybe help with a quick comparison (temp https://github.com/david-cermak/esp-smoltcp/commit/1f27f526293c3ab18da347fd34aff70366b0d700)

Author: Added a "Footprint vs lwIP" subsection using your ESP32-C3 size-components numbers (credited) — smoltcp ~85.6 KiB flash / ~74.5 KiB static RAM vs lwIP 47.4 KiB / ~1 KiB static. I spelled out the static-vs-heap caveat so the RAM comparison is fair in both directions: smoltcp pre-pays a fixed bounded budget, lwIP allocates from heap under load. A proper runtime heap-watermark comparison under identical load is still on my list — your temp commit looks like a good starting point for that, thanks.

slab pool plus the Rust scratch). On a P4 that is negligible; on a smaller
part it is a real consideration.

> ## The `select()` problem, and how the RFC fixed it

Reviewer: I think you can skip this part and focus on the actual state of the component (maybe just refer to the GH issue, so readers are aware of the history, but in general they'd be interested in 1) how it works and 2) how they can use it 3) numbers vs lwip)

Author: Done — replaced the history section with a short present-state caveat (v0.1.x needs VFS_SUPPORT_SELECT=n and why in two sentences, v0.2.0-rc.1 doesn't), with a link to the RFC issue for the background.

  socket API. smoltcp doesn't ship a Router-Solicitation client and I
  haven't written one yet.
- **The bundled DNS resolver is minimal** — single-shot, A-records only.
  Production use should bring its own resolver.

For a sense of how hard the working list has been exercised: the
socket-handle map used to run out of slots after about 24 connections until
it got proper recycling, and an early `select()` implementation spun on a
`vTaskDelay(1)` until it was made event-driven. Both are fixed — and
finding that class of bug is what separates "works" from "demo", which is
why I mention them.

## When to use it

Choose this if the safety properties of a Rust IP stack matter for your
project, or if a single predictable poll loop with bounded RAM and explicit
drop counters fits your reliability requirements better than lwIP's
threaded model. Those are the two cases it was built for.

Stay on lwIP otherwise. It integrates with the whole ecosystem, it's
thoroughly documented, and "already present and proven" is a strong
argument on its own. The aim here is to make the alternative exist, not to
argue that everyone should switch.

## Getting started

> The three components are published on the

Reviewer: Please also add some instructions to install `cargo` (not all readers and potential users would know/have it -- running just `rustup` worked for me)

Author: Added rustup install instructions to Getting started, plus the required sdkconfig.defaults options that were missing from the article (LWIP_COMPAT_ENABLE, LWIP_NETIF_LOOPBACK, and the v0.1.x VFS_SUPPORT_SELECT=n).

[ESP Component Registry](https://components.espressif.com/), so adding them
is a one-liner:

```bash
idf.py add-dependency "datanoisetv/esp_smoltcp^0.1.0"
idf.py add-dependency "datanoisetv/esp_smoltcp_lwip_compat^0.1.0"
```

> - Source, the complete `eth_basic` example, and architecture notes:

Reviewer: I noticed two minor errors (on the `main` branch) worth fixing before publishing the article:
1) `include` dir is no-existent: just remove this line https://github.com/DatanoiseTV/esp-smoltcp/blob/main/components/esp_smoltcp/CMakeLists.txt#L29
2) undefined hostname:
```cpp
#ifndef CONFIG_APP_HOSTNAME
#define CONFIG_APP_HOSTNAME "espressif"
#endif
```

Author: Both fixed, and published as esp_smoltcp_lwip_compat **0.1.1** on the registry (the `^0.1.0` range in the article resolves to it automatically):

1. The missing `include` dir was actually in `esp_smoltcp_lwip_compat` (its CMakeLists declared `INCLUDE_DIRS "include"` with no such dir — the component's API is purely `--wrap` symbols, so the line is simply removed). `esp_smoltcp` itself does ship its `include/` with the two public headers, so that one stays.
2. `CONFIG_APP_HOSTNAME` now defaults to `"espressif"` when undefined, exactly as you suggested — it was a leftover from the original template app's Kconfig. v0.2 replaces it with a proper component-level option (`CONFIG_LWIP_COMPAT_HOSTNAME`).

Fix commit: DatanoiseTV/esp-smoltcp@f7952ec, tagged v0.1.1. Thanks for actually installing it — both bugs were invisible from inside the template project where the symbols happened to exist.

tags: ["Rust", "smoltcp", "Networking", "TCP/IP", "ESP-IDF", "ESP32-P4", "lwIP"]
---

## Introduction

ESP-IDF ships with lwIP, and for most projects that's the right choice. It's
mature, well documented, and every networking component in ESP-IDF is built and
tested against it. Nothing below is an argument to replace it by default.

Still, there are two reasons you might want an alternative. The first is the
implementation language: the IP stack is the part of your firmware that
parses bytes arriving from machines you don't control, and lwIP is written
in C. The second is the concurrency model — lwIP runs several tasks and
takes a fair number of mutexes, which is harder to reason about when you
need confidence that a device will stay up for months without intervention.

## Why a second TCP/IP stack

[smoltcp](https://github.com/smoltcp-rs/smoltcp) is a `#![no_std]` TCP/IP
stack written in Rust, with no heap requirement and a single, explicit poll
model: you give it the current time and a device to read and write frames,
it does one pass of work, and you call it again. The packet parsing is safe
Rust, and there's no background thread operating on the stack behind your

> code — which addresses both concerns above.

Reviewer 3: > — which addresses both concerns above

The concluding phrase throws you back to the beginning of the paragraph. I would either rewrite the paragraph or just remove this phrase.

Author: Removed the phrase — the introduction already enumerates both concerns, so the back-reference added nothing.

sdkconfig. The short reason: ESP-IDF's `select()` doesn't go through a symbol
that `--wrap` can intercept — the VFS layer dispatches it through a
per-FD-range function-pointer table that lwIP populates at init, so smoltcp
sockets were invisible to it. Disabling VFS select sidesteps the table.

v0.2 (currently `0.2.0-rc.1` on the registry) removes the constraint
properly: the component claims the BSD-socket FD range with
`esp_vfs_register_fd_range()` and provides its own `esp_vfs_select_ops_t`,
so `select()` dispatches through the VFS the way ESP-IDF intends and the
default `CONFIG_VFS_SUPPORT_SELECT=y` just works. The design history —
including how this fix came out of the review discussion — is in the
[RFC on the esp-idf tracker](https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/issues/18549).

## Current status and limitations

What is verified and in use:

- BSD sockets, `select()`/`poll()`, and the full `esp_http_server` stack
  including chunked encoding and WebSockets
- `esp_https_server` with mbedTLS, plus `esp-tls`, `esp_http_client` and
  `esp-mqtt`, all over BSD sockets and all unchanged
- An in-RAM `127.0.0.0/8` loopback (the httpd internal control socket needs

>   one; it never reaches the wire)

Reviewer 3: > it never reaches the wire

By this, do you want to emphasize that there are no leaks? Is it something common enough that needs to be highlighted? Initially, my eye caught the pronoun `it` hwich was not clear what it refered to.

Author: The point was that the loopback is implemented inside the shim's memory rather than via the Ethernet driver — it's there because esp_http_server's internal control socket requires a working 127.0.0.1. Reworded to name the socket and say "forwarded entirely in RAM instead of going out through the Ethernet driver", no dangling pronoun.

- IGMPv2 multicast, ICMP echo, and IPv6 link-local with ping6 and
  NDP/ICMPv6
- A raw L2 frame tap for PTP, LLDP and custom EtherTypes, with the P4
  hardware timestamp wired up
- Per-interface statistics and the frame-pool drop counter

And what I'm not claiming:

> - **Only the ESP32-P4 is hardware-verified.** Other RISC-V parts should

Reviewer 3: > Other RISC-V parts

By `parts`, do you imply other SoCs / chips?

Author: Yes, SoCs — reworded (also the "smaller parts" occurrence in the footprint section, same issue).

```

That's all the Rust setup there is — the component pins its exact toolchain
in a `rust-toolchain.toml`, so on the first build `rustup` fetches the
right nightly and the RISC-V target on its own.

The components themselves are on the
[ESP Component Registry](https://components.espressif.com/):

{{< figure
    default=true
    src="img/esp-smoltcp-registry.webp"
    alt="The esp_smoltcp component on the ESP Component Registry"
    caption="esp_smoltcp on the ESP Component Registry"
    >}}

Adding them to a project is two lines:

```bash
idf.py add-dependency "datanoisetv/esp_smoltcp^0.1.0"
idf.py add-dependency "datanoisetv/esp_smoltcp_lwip_compat^0.1.0"
```

(Use at least `esp_smoltcp_lwip_compat` 0.1.1 — 0.1.0 had two packaging
bugs that broke standalone installs, found during the review of this very
article. The `^0.1.0` range above resolves to 0.1.1 automatically.)

Then set the required options in your project's `sdkconfig.defaults`:

```
CONFIG_LWIP_COMPAT_ENABLE=y     # turn the BSD-sockets shim on
CONFIG_LWIP_NETIF_LOOPBACK=y    # esp_http_server compile-time check
CONFIG_VFS_SUPPORT_SELECT=n     # v0.1.x only — see the select() section
```

> The last line is the v0.1.x constraint explained above; the v0.2 release

Reviewer 3: > The last line

This is a bit ambiguous. I suggest making it explicit what you talk about. Your article might be read not only be humans, but also by AI these days :)

```suggestion
The option `CONFIG_VFS_SUPPORT_SELECT` is the v0.1.x constraint explained above; the v0.2 release
```

Author: Taken as suggested — the option is now named explicitly.
